Does something exist because you believe it does?
Does something not exist simply because you don't believe in it?
No, truth is based on evidence, but what kind of evidence convinces you that something exists?
We believe in many things. We can't see air, wind, atoms, electricity, gravity, time, and
and we believe in things we can't hear, galaxies, dog whistles, microorganisms.
We also believe in things we can't feel, such as our brain, or the rotation of the earth.
But why? What convinces you the effects, effects that you can see, hear, feel, and measure,
and the testimony from those who know the facts? Evidence. Evidence is the basis for faith.
Today, many people don't believe that God exists. Their lack of faith can affect us,
indeed, our faith is under attack. This symposium will remind us of our reasons for faith,
and will help us to strengthen our faith. We'll consider why we have faith in God's existence,
in His Word, in His moral standards, and in His love. First, why is faith in God's existence
important? Please find Ephesians chapter 2. And notice how the Apostle Paul describes Christians
in Ephesus before they knew the true God, Ephesians chapter 2, and verse 1 reads,
Furthermore, God made you alive, though you were dead in your trespasses and sins,
and verse 12 continues, at that time you were without Christ, alienated from the state of Israel,
strangers to the covenants of the promise you had no hope, and were without God in the world.
The same was true for us, but faith in the existence of the Creator has given our lives meaning,
and purpose, it has unlocked the answers to such questions as, why does the universe exist,
and what does the future hold? True, there are people who shy away from such questions,
thinking that the answers are just beyond us, some even teach that there is no purpose,
no ultimate meaning in life. But where does that leave them, without reliable guidance?
In contrast, notice what Psalm 11110 teaches us about the effect of our faith. Psalm 111 verse 10
says, the fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, all those observing his orders show good
insight, his praise, indoors forever. Yes, clear thinking and practical application of knowledge
begin with regarding the Creator with awe and profound respect, and as indicated in the very
next verse, this makes us happier people. That's why we need to safeguard our faith. It's the
foundation for our relationship with God, the basis for our hope, the key to our future.
So let's remind ourselves why we can have faith in God's existence. Let's go back to the chapter
of the Bible that defines faith. Hebrews chapter 11, Hebrews 111 tells us that faith is the
convincing evidence of realities that are not seen. But now what would be an example of that?
Let's read together Hebrews 113. It says, by faith, we perceive that the systems of things were put
in order by God's word so that what is seen has come into existence from things that are not visible,
the systems of things. What might be some of those systems? Could this include our solar system
and the galactic system that it's a part of and the smaller cycles that occur within our solar system?
Think about our Earth's atmosphere, which protects us from the sun's harmful rays while at the same
time allowing the entry of essential heat and light. Just think what would happen to us were it
not for our atmosphere's protective shield. We'd burn up in seconds. And besides a blocking out
harmful rays, the atmosphere along with Earth's magnetic field also absorbs much of the debris
that flies through space. By faith, we perceive that these systems were put in order by God's word.
Or think about the Earth's amazing cycles. Imagine what would happen if a city's water supply,
its fresh air, its water were disrupted and the sewers were blocked. What would be the quality
of life in that city? And yet, our planet is a closed system. Clean air and water are not
shipped in from outer space. Waste matter is not rocketed out. So how does the Earth remain
healthy and habitable? The water cycle, the carbon and oxygen cycles, and the nitrogen cycle,
all tuned precisely to sustain life. Of course, this doesn't mean that we can be careless
stewards of our planet, but what remarkable systems and much more could be said about the Earth's
perfect location in our solar system or about the planet's perfect orbit, tilt, rotational speed
and unusual moon or about our solar system's perfect position in the Milky Way. Are all of these
precise locations and elegant measurements the result of blind chance or of purposeful design?
As you watch the following video, note yet another example of how the order evident in creation
clearly points to an all-wise creator. Our bodies are made up of trillions of cells.
Yet each individual cell is a marvel of design and organization.
Inside our cells, biological processes signal specific proteins to assemble themselves into
tracks called microtubules. Tiny molecular machines called kinesens then transport various
components to different parts of the cell by walking along the tracks, from microscopic proteins
to enormous galaxies. Our organized universe abounds with examples of elegant design.
How can you strengthen your faith in God's existence? Consider three things that we can do. Please
open your Bibles to Romans chapter 1. When we consider examples like these of God's power and wisdom,
it doesn't make us wonder how could anyone deny the evidence of an intelligent and loving designer.
Romans 118 indicates that such denial requires suppressing the truth. Why? Well, notice what it says
at Romans 119. Because what may be known about God is clearly evident. Clearly evident among them.
For God made it clear to them. Verse 20 says, for his invisible qualities are clearly seen from
the world's creation onward because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power
and Godship so that they, namely those who suppress the truth, are inexcusable.
God's existence and his qualities were apparent the moment mankind first appeared on earth.
And the evidence has only become clearer with the passage of time and the advancement of technology
that enables us to discover what God has done. So that's the first way that we strengthen our faith
in God's existence through study and meditation, meditating on the evidence. And to help us with this,
we find an abundance of published material about creation on JW.org where we find brochures,
articles in the series, was it designed and interviews with scientists?
The second way that we strengthen our faith is by earnestly praying for more faith.
Jesus said as recorded at Luke 1113 that God will give his Holy Spirit to those asking him for it,
and part of that Spirit's fruitage is faith. Third, we strengthen our faith by building the faith
of others. How? By drawing attention to the evidence that supports the truth. Parents,
patiently build the faith of your children. If they have doubts, address them promptly, kindly,
don't dismiss their questions and don't get upset. Be glad they asked. It shows they care and they
want to understand, accept the challenge, present the evidence, look for it together when you sit in your
house, when you walk on the road, when you lie down, and when you get up. In the following video,
note what strengthens the faith of one of our brothers who is a scientist.
As a mechanical design educator, I view even natural things from a design perspective.
Mechanical design considers not only the individual components of a machine, but also how they interact.
From this viewpoint, human vision is a magnificent example of design.
For a single eye, the cornea, the iris, and the lens interact to focus an image on the retina.
The light-sensitive cells of the retina call photoreceptors produce nerve signals.
Signals from the rod and cone photoreceptors are transmitted by the optic nerve
to the brain with their process to produce a perceived image.
Now, just imagine the multiplied complexity when two eyes interact.
Particularly mind-boggling is the amount of information being constantly processed
by more than 130 million retinal receptors and then transmitted through the 1.2 million
nerve fibers of the optic nerve to the brain. To me, the sheer complexity of how all these
components flawlessly interact is evidence of a superior designer. Some disagree.
They propose that the eye evolve from a light-sensitive patch in some ancestral creature through
small random changes. I find the proposed process unrealistic. Unlike design, it is unplanned
and without a goal. We are asked to imagine that a complex system can develop without direction
while in the natural world things tend to become disorganized, but consider something even more
mind-boggling. The design of the eye, the optic nerve, and brain, and how they function and interact
are completely documented in our DNA. In fact, our DNA contains all the instructions
for building an entire human body. While science relies only on physical explanations,
many individual scientists reason that highly-ordered natural systems are evidence of a designer.
My personal conclusion is that there is a God who is revealed in the magnificent designs
of nature. How does faith in God's existence benefit us?
Having genuine faith in the loving, intelligent designer of this universe gives our lives
meaning and purpose. That faith is the basis for obedience to Jehovah's Righteous Standard,
standards that benefit us. But we don't fear the future because faith gives us hope. We don't
fear death because our hope is in the source of life. How happy we are that Jehovah has provided
abundant evidence that he exists, and yet are there facets of Jehovah's personality that we
couldn't fully comprehend from a study of creation alone? Yes, and for this we need to study his
inspired word. How can we strengthen our faith in God's Word? Please pay careful attention to
Brother Mark Newmer, a helper to the teaching committee, as he now presents the next talk of this
symposium, why we have faith in God's Word.